Watch the setup carefully. The spoon is touching the warm cup. That contact matters. Heat is not a magic beam leaping across an empty board. In this example, the warmer cup can transfer heat into the cooler spoon through the place where they touch. The yellow arrows travel through the contact point, not through random air.
Now the spoon warms. The board shows the cup first, then the spoon, then the contact point, then the heat arrows. The evidence question is: which object was warmer, which was cooler, and which way did the heat move? For this chapter, keep the rule concrete: heat can move from warmer things to cooler things.
A thermometer now enters the story. The same thermometer is dipped into warm water, then cool water, and the number changes. The thermometer measures how warm the spoon is. Heat is the thing that travels into the spoon and makes that number go up. Temperature is the reading. Heat is what moves.
A student might ask, so heat is the number? Good interruption. No. The number tells us how warm something is. Heat is the energy moving from the warmer object to the cooler object. We are keeping the language careful because this idea is hard even for older learners. Number: temperature. Moving warmth: heat transfer.
Now we use the particle model. Both sides use the same dot colour, because we are not teaching hot dots and cold dots. We vary only the wiggle. On the cooler side, the dots wiggle gently. On the warmer side, the same kind of dots jiggle more. The movement changes; the dots do not become different substances.
Cooling is the reverse evidence story. Put a warm object in a cooler place, and heat can move away. The particle motion in the model becomes less energetic, but the dots never stop completely. Never draw frozen-dead particles. The careful sentence is: cooling can make particle motion slow down.
Safety now. Use warm tap water only, and a parent checks first. No boiling water, no flame, no hot glass, no closed container heating. This is a training chapter, not a kitchen hazard challenge. The board draws a parent icon, a warm tap-water icon, and a no-boiling symbol before any optional observation is mentioned.
Let us predict direction. Warm hand touches cool cup: which way does heat move at first? Warm room around a cold bottle: what warms what? If a learner predicts cool to warm, the wrong arrow gently shakes, then redraws from warmer to cooler. Wrong answers are useful when the correction is visible.
The chapter test will ask you to separate the thermometer reading from heat transfer, choose the direction of heat movement, and spot the safe setup. Remember the contact point, the thermometer sentence, and the same-colour particle dots with different wiggle sizes.
Let us practise the hard distinction. I touch the thermometer to the spoon and read a number. That number is temperature. I watch the spoon warm because it is touching the warmer cup. That movement of energy is heat transfer. Temperature is the reading. Heat transfer is the process that can change the reading.
Repair a weak answer. A learner says, the yellow arrow is heat flying like a laser. No. In this example the spoon touches the cup, and the arrow shows heat moving through the contact point from warmer material toward cooler material. The arrow is a thinking symbol. It is not a beam you can see.
Now try a wrong prediction. If the cool spoon touches the warm cup, and you draw an arrow from the spoon into the cup, the board shakes the arrow and asks: which object was warmer first? The warm cup was warmer, so the first heat arrow should go from cup toward spoon. Wrong arrows are not failures. They are repair moments.
Before the test, keep four clues ready: warmer object, cooler object, contact or pathway, and thermometer reading. Also remember the particle model rule: same dot colour, different wiggle size. We are not inventing hot particles. We are showing particles moving more when warmed.
One last transfer check before the test. Imagine a cool metal spoon touching warm soup, then imagine the same spoon sitting alone on the table. In the first case there is a contact pathway from warmer soup to cooler spoon. In the second case the spoon is not being warmed by the soup. The arrow belongs only when there is a heat-transfer story to tell. Say the warmer object, say the cooler object, say the contact point, then say what the thermometer would show changing over time.
Final training pause before the test. Do not rush this last board. For Heat Makes Particles Dance, say the main idea in your own words, then test it against one new example. If the example changes the job, the material, the state, the heat direction, or the evidence, update the answer instead of memorising the last picture. That is why this is training, not just a video. The test checks whether the idea transfers.